---
layout: article
title: Craving entertainment
released: true
status: ready
defs: [teach]
---

Human minds crave entertainment. And by entertainment, I'm broadly
including music, art, storytelling, sports, and just plain old playful
goofing around.

For minds with neural nets in them, being entertained is not just idle
time wasted. It has a very serious and crucial purpose, one that
evolution has selected strongly, at least in people.

Entertainment is how you train a neural net. When we like
entertainment, it's because our neural nets crave training and seek
more of it in order to become better at what they recognize.

We tend to find confirmation pleasing. We seek entertainment because it
reinforces what we've already been trained to recognize.

We tend to find repetition with small differences pleasing. That's the
perfect way to test our pattern-recognizers.

Music, art, storytelling, sports, and play are training for your
pattern recognizers.  These help you get better at classifying what
your senses experience.

Scripted entertainment with happy endings are positive reinforcement
training. They show your neural nets examples of situations with good
outcomes, and train you on what you should *try to do* if you
experience them.

Comedy and horror are forms of scripted entertainment with negative
reinforcement training. They show your neural nets examples of
situations with bad outcomes, and train you on what you should 
*try not to do* if you experience them.

Unscripted entertainment, like play, sports, competitive games (like
xbox or chess), and shopping provide both positive and negative
training.

We like surprises, but up to an acceptable limit. Surrealist art and
murder mysteries work as entertainment when the audience expects a
surprise, and gets one. In a sense, even the surprises are pleasing when
our pattern recognizers classify them as such.


