---
layout: article
title: Social information structures
arts: [cyber]
created_date: 2021-12-17
released: true
status: ready

---

### Durable information structures

Among people, *institutions* are things like the court system, the
press, markets, hospitals, or corporations. These are first and
foremost information structures.

Individuals can work together to build physical structures, like
houses, bridges, and factories. But they also build information
structures. An information structure is a set of ideas, shared by a
social group.

You can tell that ants and people are social beings, because they
create institutions. An institution is a durable information structure
that is sustained by the consensus behavior of individuals over time.
It lasts because of the storage and two-way exchange of information.
Individuals contribute information to institutions, while at the same
time, the institution contributes information to individuals.

### Institutions cannot act

This information exchange leads to individual action: the institution
by itself cannot act. An institution cannot cut down a tree, build a
house, or arrest anyone. Only people (or the physical structures they
build) can act. Institutions process information and make decisions,
but ultimately those decisions only become actions when an individual
receives those decisions and acts on them.


Broadly speaking, institutions fail in one of two distinct ways:

* *Hyperinstitutionism* - empowering institutions to the point where
individuals are harmed. These institutions have too much power (or the
wrong kinds of power) over individuals.

* *Hypoinstitutionism* - weakening institutions to the point where
individuals are harmed, because they fail to provide the services they
were supposed to.

We talk about institutions in terms of our trust in them. This trust is
itself an institution, a durable information structure that's shared
among individuals.

### So what

How do we make institutions strong enough, but not too strong?  We
want them to be strong enough to protect us and provide us with
services. We don't want them to be too strong and push us
around. [Cybernetics](cyber) is the art of finding the middle ground,
not too much, and not too little.

In the era of physical warfare, enemies attack our physical structures
with guns and bombs. To weaken or destroy a social group, you
basically needed to attack the physical things produced by that group.

In the era of information warfare, enemies attack our information
structures with artificial trust. To weaken or destroy a social group,
you basically need to attack their institutions.
