---
layout: article
title: Zero-sum vs. win-win
released: true
---

### Zero-sum

In a perfectly zero-sum world, winning and losing is symmetrical.  If
someone scores a point, it means someone else will lose a point.  The
world is classified into "self" and "opponent."  Hurting your opponent
is the same as helping yourself. In a zero-sum world, finding a meal
means your opponent will go hungry, and vice-versa.

Logically speaking, hurting others is a perfectly sound strategy.  If
you find that helping yourself is difficult or expensive, and hurting
others is easy and cheap, the path to success is clear.

Sports is one place where this sort of zero-sum competition is
ubiquitous.  In most sports, a team's standing is really a question of
rearranging the names at the top of the league. In order for one team
to move into first place and win the huge prize, another team must
move downwards by an equal and opposite amount.

The same is largely true of politics. Elections are zero-sum game with
winners and losers. The loss of one party is exactly equal and
opposite to the win of the other party. The American press covers
politics the same way it covers sports: as a zero-sum game.



### Lose-lose

It's understandable that people who learn zero-sum thinking from
zero-sum contests like sports and politics could apply the same
zero-sum thinking to other contests.

If you think of the world in zero-sum terms, as I said earlier, you
might seek to hurt others, because it could very well be a sound strategy.

Outside of sports and politics, it's possible for both competitors to
be losers. Not every loss is matched by a gain. The lose-lose outcome
is fairly inexpensive and easy to achieve.  Perhaps you can find a way
to spoil your enemy's meal, causing them to go hungry. That alone
doesn't guarantee that you'll get any food yourself. Feeding yourself
takes work and effort, and skills that are quite different than the
skills of ruining someone else's food.


